Guide- ATC Interaction

I hope you haven’t left the gate because this one is quite lengthy.

BEFORE leaving the gate, COMPREHEND the ATIS. Understand what it is saying. Once you’ve done this, request pushback. 

BEFORE commencing taxi, look for taxi routes that’ll get you to the runway as fast, as safely and as efficient as humanely possible. Once this is established, request taxi.

BEFORE taking off, analyze what direction your FPL takes you out of the outermost airspace ring. If it’s North, request departure to the North. Unless you plan to do pattern work with tower, DO NOT request remaining in the pattern.

AFTER takeoff, if there is an active radar frequency that’s accepting departures, tower WILL send you to that frequency. If there isn’t, you’ll be given a “frequency change approved” command. This means you tune out of tower and do not tune in to a radar frequency. Only do so if tower EXPLICITLY told you to.

AFTER contacting radar, if you have a flight plan to your destination, “check in” or request a “flight following. If you want some help getting to your destination, feel free to request “radar vectors”. At no point do you need to request more than one service. Pick one and stick with it. At any point you’re given a vector, follow it so long it is safe. Vectors override your FPL. Furthermore, you’ll get a frequency change when the controller deems necessary. If you get to cruise and still haven’t been told to change frequency, request a frequency change. 

BEFORE contacting radar for a service into your destination, COMPREHEND the ATIS. Once you’ve done so, go ahead and call approach. In busy airspaces, you’ll be better off requesting an ILS approach, a visual approach or radar vectors. Never request more than one. Never request an altitude change or disobey vectors unless you’re about to meet your demise. 

WHEN cleared for an ILS approach, you are entrusted to turn onto the localizer once its established. Furthermore, call inbound on the ILS or VIS depending on which you were cleared for. If you are on radar vectors, the generic inbound call will suffice. You are released from all speed restrictions prior to being cleared when you are cleared. 
